ISS

International Space Station (ISS) — 
a manned orbital station used as a multi-purpose space research facility;  operated from the end of 1998 to the present (the countries have agreed on operation until 2024 inclusive, an extension of the operation period until 2028 or 2030 is being considered).  The ISS is a joint international project in which 14 countries participate: Russia, the USA, Japan, Canada and Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, France, Switzerland, Sweden, members of the European Space Agency (initially  were Brazil and the UK.

The ISS is included in the Guinness Book of Records as the most expensive object built by man.  The total cost of the station is over $150 billion.

The ISS is controlled by: the American segment - from the Lyndon Johnson Mission Control Center in Houston and the Russian segment - from the Space Flight Control Center in Korolev.  The control of the laboratory modules - the European "Columbus" and the Japanese "Kibo" - is controlled by the Control Centers of the European Space Agency (Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (Tsukuba).  There is a constant exchange of information between the Centers.

In 1984, US President Ronald Reagan announced the start of work on the creation of an international orbital station;  in 1988, the planned station was named "Freedom".  At that time it was a joint project of the USA, ESA, Canada and Japan.  A large-sized controlled station was planned, the modules of which would be delivered one by one into orbit by the Space Shuttle from 1981.  But by the beginning of the 1990s, it became clear that the cost of developing the project was too high, and it was decided to create a station together with Russia.

On September 2, 1993, US Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin announced a new project for a "truly international space station."  From that moment on, the official name of the station became the International Space Station, although the unofficial name, the Alpha space station, was also used in parallel.  On November 1, 1993, the RSA and NASA signed the Detailed Work Plan for the International Space Station.

On November 20, 1998, the first element of the ISS was launched into orbit - the Zarya functional cargo block, which was built in Russia by order and at the expense of NASA.  The launch was carried out using the Russian Proton-K space rocket. The module is part of the Russian Segment of the ISS, at the same time it is the property of NASA.

One of the main points of the creation of the ISS was the possibility of conducting experiments at the station that require unique conditions of space flight: microgravity, vacuum, cosmic radiation not attenuated by the earth's atmosphere.  The main areas of research include biology (including biomedical research and biotechnology), physics (including fluid physics, materials science and quantum physics), astronomy, cosmology and meteorology.

The size of the station is sufficient for its observation with the naked eye from the surface of the Earth.  The ISS is observed as a rather bright star, quickly moving across the sky approximately from west to east (an angular velocity of about 4 degrees per minute). The European Space Agency, together with the site "www.heavens-above.com", provides an opportunity for everyone to find out the schedule of ISS flights over a certain settlement on the planet.  By going to the page of the site dedicated to the ISS, and entering the name of the city of interest in Latin, you can get the exact time and a graphic image of the station's flight path over it in the coming days.  You can also view the flight schedule at “www.amsat.org”. The ISS flight path in real time can be seen on the website of the Federal Space Agency.  You can also use the program "Heavensat" (or "Orbitron").  The site “www.iss.stormway.ru” broadcasts video from the cameras installed on board the ISS in real time, and also displays information about the current position of the station.
